UCUM ADR (#1268)
microbiomedata/issues: decisions/adr-ucum-implementation.md

---
status: accepted
date: 2025-07-01
deciders: Chris Mungall (@cmungall), Montana Smith (@mslarae13), Mark Miller (@turbomam), Katherine Heal (@kheal)

> consulted: Samantha Obermiller (@samobermiller), Bea Meluch (@bmeluch), Patrick Kalita (@pkalita-lbl), Lee Ann McCue (@leeannmccue), Sujay Patil (@sujaypatil96), Alicia Clum (@aclum)

Reviewer: Sierra Moxon @sierra-moxon

- **Hybrid approach (@cmungall's suggestion)** - Keep the existing `QuantityValue` structure, constrain allowed units to the UCUM symbol for the MIxS-preferred unit(s), and auto-convert full-name units to UCUM on ingest. Balances MIxS alignment with practical data handling.  
- **Exploratory `range_expression` association** - Instead of using `storage_units` annotations, associate slots and units via a `range_expression` (as discussed in [PR 2599](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2599)). That's an experimental LinkML feature that could be applied to any schema development goal, not just the UCUM case.  
- **Chosen solution** - Introduce a `storage_units` annotation that lists allowed UCUM symbols per slot and enforce it via validation tests. This aligns with the hybrid approach while providing a clear, maintainable mechanism for unit standardization.

## Decision Outcomes

Upon implementation of UCUM, all NMDC slots with `range: QuantityValue` will have a `storage_units` annotation to designate allowed units and required formats for data.

## Validation

The UCUM implementation introduces several layers of validation:

> - **Schema annotation tests** - We wrote automated tests (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`) that check each `QuantityValue` slot has a `storage_units` annotation. A small number of slots currently retain temporary `units_alignment_excuse` annotations (e.g., `api`, `efficiency_percent`, `inside_lux`) for cases requiring resolution of MIxS specification inconsistencies or analysis of complex/non-UCUM units. The goal is to eliminate all excuse annotations by providing proper UCUM `storage_units` for every slot or converting non-complinat units to non-QuantifyValue range so all QuantityValue ranges are UCUM compliant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Schema annotation tests** - We wrote automated tests (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`) which check that each `QuantityValue` slot has a `storage_units` annotation. A small number of slots currently retain temporary `units_alignment_excuse` annotations (e.g., `api`, `efficiency_percent`, `inside_lux`) for cases requiring resolution of MIxS specification inconsistencies or analysis of complex/non-UCUM units. The goal is to eliminate all excuse annotations by providing proper UCUM `storage_units` for every slot or converting non-compliant units to non-QuantifyValue range so all QuantityValue ranges are UCUM compliant.
```

- **UCUM code validation** - Automated tests (`tests/test_has_unit_enum.py`) verify that all permissible values in the `UnitEnum` are valid UCUM codes using the ucumvert parser library.
- **Instance data validation plugin** - A custom validation plugin (`NmdcSchemaValidationPlugin`) extends LinkML's pluggable validation framework to validate instance data against the `storage_units` constraints. This plugin checks that the `has_unit` value in each `QuantityValue` object matches the allowed units specified in the slot's `storage_units` annotation, and works in conjunction with LinkML's built-in `JsonSchemaValidationPlugin`.

These three mechanisms together guarantee that both the schema definition and the actual data conform to the UCUM standard.

## More Information

### Migrating existing NMDC data
This section describes the process for migrating existing data. 

**Implementation of annotations and slot requirements**

> The UCUM integration introduces a new annotation `storage_units` on slots of type `QuantityValue`. This annotation lists the allowed UCUM unit symbols (pipe-separated) and is used by the NMDC validation suite.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The UCUM integration introduces a new annotation `storage_units` on slots with range `QuantityValue`. This annotation lists the allowed UCUM unit symbols (pipe-separated) and is used by the NMDC validation suite.
```

```yaml
# Example slot definition in a LinkML schema
nitrate:
  range: QuantityValue
  description: "Measured concentration of nitrate"
  annotations:
    storage_units: "mmol/L|g/L"
```

**Annotation semantics**

- **`storage_units`** - a string containing one or more UCUM symbols, separated by pipes if necessary.

> - The `storage_units` annotation is **mandatory** for every `QuantityValue` slot. `units_alignment_excuse` was allowed during development and should not be added to any subsequent `QuantityValue` slots.

Reviewer 3: Should we add a test to detect whether any new `units_alignment_excuse` annotations have been added?

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/issues/2724

- The `UnitEnum` used to validate `storage_units` entries is a project-specific, organic enumeration of UCUM symbols; it may not be suitable for other schemas.

**Enforcement**

Automated tests (described in the [Validation](#validation) section above) run on every PR via CI; failures block merging until compliance is achieved.

**Workflow for new slots**

- Define the slot in the appropriate YAML file under `src/schema/`.
- Add a pipe-delimited list of UCUM symbols to `storage_units`. Each element must be a permissible value of `UnitEnum`; add to `UnitEnum` if necessary.
- Run `make test` locally to ensure the validation passes.

**Owner responsibilities**

- Audit existing `QuantityValue` slots and populate `storage_units` where possible.
- Review PRs that modify schema files to ensure compliance.

**Historical migration process**

> The migration to UCUM-compliant units proceeds through a pipeline that is fully scripted and version-controlled. All artifacts referenced below exist in the repository or in linked GitHub issues/PRs. *Note: Some of the scripts mentioned in this pipeline, particularly those in the `units/scripts` directory, are non-essential for the core migration process.*

Reviewer 2: Should this be present tense? This is describing work that is complete, correct? This reads to me like it's describing a pipeline to use again, and maybe I'm misunderstanding but I thought we won't have to migrate data like this again.

> The migration to UCUM-compliant units proceeds through a pipeline that is fully scripted and version-controlled. All artifacts referenced below exist in the repository or in linked GitHub issues/PRs. *Note: Some of the scripts mentioned in this pipeline, particularly those in the `units/scripts` directory, are non-essential for the core migration process.*

Author: ```suggestion
The migration to UCUM-compliant units was accomplished through a pipeline that was fully scripted and version-controlled. All artifacts referenced below exist in the repository or in linked GitHub issues/PRs. *Note: Some of the scripts mentioned in this pipeline, particularly those in the `units/scripts` directory, are non-essential for the core migration process.*
```

**2. Human review & gap list curation**

- Check `output/schema_ucum_input.tsv` and update the definitive gap list in `units/docs/units-problems-definitive.md`. This document records:
  - Slots that can receive a `storage_units` annotation.
  - Slots that cannot be expressed in UCUM and therefore receive a `units_alignment_excuse` (e.g., `api`, `soil_text_measure`).
- The curated TSV is committed back to the repo, becoming the single source of truth for the migration.

**3. Apply annotations to the schema**

- **Generate yq commands** - `make units-schema-generate` runs `units/scripts/schema_generate_yq_commands.py` which reads the curated TSV and writes two command files:
  - `output/yq_commands_single_unit.txt` - one-liner `yq` commands for slots with a single allowed unit.
  - `output/yq_commands_multi_unit.txt` - commands for slots with a pipe-separated list of allowed units.
- **Apply changes** - Pipe the command files into the shell (or open a PR) to modify the YAML schema files under `src/schema/`. The resulting PR was [PR #2599](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2599).

> **4.  Production data migration & validation**
> 
> _To be deprecated by `NmdcSchemaValidationPlugin`-based methods_
> 

Author: ```suggestion
**4.  Production data migration & validation**

_To be deprecated by `NmdcSchemaValidationPlugin`-based methods_

This section describes scripts and actions to migrate and validate data. These scripts were removed when accomplished and no longer exist. See commit `dec51f3c9`
```

- **Export MongoDB** - `make local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml` uses `pure-export` to dump the live NMDC database to a single YAML file.
- **Validate production data** - Scripts in `units/scripts/` (such as `ucum_validate_units.py`) check production data against the schema's `storage_units` constraints.

> - **Validation mechanisms** - As described in the [Validation](#validation) section above, multiple automated tests ensure schema compliance.

Reviewer 3: many of these scripts and make targets were removed in commit `dec51f3c9`

Author: remove script names and generalize what was accomplished as these scripts no longer exist

---
status: accepted
date: 2025-07-01
deciders: Chris Mungall (@cmungall), Montana Smith (@mslarae13), Mark Miller (@turbomam), Katherine Heal (@kheal)

> consulted: Samantha Obermiller (@samobermiller), Bea Meluch (@bmeluch), Patrick Kalita (@pkalita-lbl), Lee Ann McCue (@leeannmccue), Sujay Patil (@sujaypatil96), Alicia Clum (@aclum)

Author: ```suggestion
consulted: Samantha Obermiller (@samobermiller), Bea Meluch (@bmeluch), Patrick Kalita (@pkalita-lbl), Lee Ann McCue (@leeannmccue), Sujay Patil (@sujaypatil96), Alicia Clum (@aclum), Sierra Moxon (@sierra-moxon 
```

- **Hybrid approach (@cmungall's suggestion)** - Keep the existing `QuantityValue` structure, constrain allowed units to the UCUM symbol for the MIxS-preferred unit(s), and auto-convert full-name units to UCUM on ingest. Balances MIxS alignment with practical data handling.  
- **Exploratory `range_expression` association** - Instead of using `storage_units` annotations, associate slots and units via a `range_expression` (as discussed in [PR 2599](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/pull/2599)). That's an experimental LinkML feature that could be applied to any schema development goal, not just the UCUM case.  
- **Chosen solution** - Introduce a `storage_units` annotation that lists allowed UCUM symbols per slot and enforce it via validation tests. This aligns with the hybrid approach while providing a clear, maintainable mechanism for unit standardization.

## Decision Outcomes

Upon implementation of UCUM, all NMDC slots with `range: QuantityValue` will have a `storage_units` annotation to designate allowed units and required formats for data.

## Validation

The UCUM implementation introduces several layers of validation:

> - **Schema annotation tests** - We wrote automated tests (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`) that check each `QuantityValue` slot has a `storage_units` annotation. A small number of slots currently retain temporary `units_alignment_excuse` annotations (e.g., `api`, `efficiency_percent`, `inside_lux`) for cases requiring resolution of MIxS specification inconsistencies or analysis of complex/non-UCUM units. The goal is to eliminate all excuse annotations by providing proper UCUM `storage_units` for every slot.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Schema annotation tests** - We wrote automated tests (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`) that check each `QuantityValue` slot has a `storage_units` annotation. A small number of slots currently retain temporary `units_alignment_excuse` annotations (e.g., `api`, `efficiency_percent`, `inside_lux`) for cases requiring resolution of MIxS specification inconsistencies or analysis of complex/non-UCUM units. The goal is to eliminate all excuse annotations by providing proper UCUM `storage_units` for every slot or converting non-complinat units to non-QuantifyValue range so all QuantityValue ranges are UCUM compliant.
```

- **UCUM code validation** - Automated tests (`tests/test_has_unit_enum.py`) verify that all permissible values in the `UnitEnum` are valid UCUM codes using the ucumvert parser library.
- **Instance data validation plugin** - A custom validation plugin (`NmdcSchemaValidationPlugin`) extends LinkML's pluggable validation framework to validate instance data against the `storage_units` constraints. This plugin checks that the `has_unit` value in each `QuantityValue` object matches the allowed units specified in the slot's `storage_units` annotation, and works in conjunction with LinkML's built-in `JsonSchemaValidationPlugin`.

These three mechanisms together guarantee that both the schema definition and the actual data conform to the UCUM standard.

## More Information

### Migrating existing NMDC data

> 
> **Implementation of annotations and slot requirements**
> 
> The UCUM integration introduces a new annotation `storage_units` on slots of type `QuantityValue`. This annotation lists the allowed UCUM unit symbols (pipe-separated) and is used by the NMDC validation suite.
> 
> This section describes the process for migrating existing data. 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
### Migrating existing NMDC data
This section describes the process for migrating existing data. 

**Implementation of annotations and slot requirements**

The UCUM integration introduces a new annotation `storage_units` on slots of type `QuantityValue`. This annotation lists the allowed UCUM unit symbols (pipe-separated) and is used by the NMDC validation suite.

```

---
status: accepted
date: 2025-07-01
deciders: Chris Mungall, Montana Smith, Mark Miller, Katherine Heal
consulted: Samantha Obermiller, Bea Meluch, Patrick Kalita, Lee Ann McCue, Sujay Patil, Alicia Clum
informed:
---

# UCUM implementation in NMDC

## Context and Problem Statement

> NMDC records measurements in two places: the **submission‑schema**, where values appear as a single `{value}{unit}` string, and the **nmdc-schema, for data storage**, where a `QuantityValue` class stores the numeric part in `has_value` and the unit in `has_unit`. Although many slots document a `preferred_unit` (originating from MIxS), most currently accept any unit (e.g., `cm`, `meter`, or even `banana`), which breaks data interoperability.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NMDC records measurements in two places: the **submission‑schema**, where values appear as a single `{value} {unit}` string, and the **nmdc-schema, for data storage**, where a `QuantityValue` class stores the numeric part in `has_value` and the unit in `has_unit`. Although many slots document a `preferred_unit` (originating from MIxS), most currently accept any unit (e.g., `cm`, `meter`, or even `banana`) in `has_unit`, which breaks data interoperability.
```

A large number of MIxS‑derived slots lack a `preferred_unit` annotation or contain ambiguous or non‑UCUM units, such as:

- `abs_air_humidity` lists "gram per gram or cubic centimeter per cubic centimeter"  
- `efficiency_percent` uses "mg/kg (ppm)"  

> - `inside_lux` mislabels a power‑density unit as illuminance, and `rel_humidity_out` has ambiguous humidity units  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `inside_lux` mislabels a power‑density unit as illuminance
- `rel_humidity_out` has ambiguous humidity units  
```

- `api` relies on a petroleum‑industry convention

These inconsistencies hinder reliable validation and downstream analysis. By adopting UCUM, we will standardize every measurement to a canonical UCUM symbol, record any unavoidable gaps with `units_alignment_excuse`, and enforce the mapping through the `storage_units` annotation.

To address this, NMDC will adopt the **Unified Code for Units of Measure (UCUM)**, a canonical, machine‑readable set of unit symbols that can be automatically validated. This ADR describes:

> - how existing NMDC (meta)data was migrated and restructured into a UCUM‑valid format,  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- how existing NMDC metadata was migrated and restructured into a UCUM‑valid format,  
```

- how annotations are used to require UCUM units, slot requirements, and how new slots added to the NMDC schema must comply,  
- the ETL updates required for NMDC's data ingest (work in progress),  
- how ingested data can be checked and validated,  
- updates to the submission portal ingest and validation.

## Considered Options

- Create various subclasses of `QuantityValue` for slots we want constrained, example `QuantityValueTemp` where `has_unit` is required and constrained to 'C'. Downside to approach was that a separate `QuantityValue` subclass had to be made for each `has_unit` value we wanted to require.
- Create subclass `QuantityValuewithUnit` where `has_unit` is a required slot and constrained to enum `UnitEnum`. Downside to approach was that any of the `UnitEnum` values could be used for any slot (i.e. 'm' could be used for `temp` slot)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

- **Hybrid approach (Chris Mungall’s suggestion)** – Keep the existing `QuantityValue` structure, constrain allowed units to the UCUM symbol for the MIxS‑preferred unit(s), and auto‑convert full‑name units to UCUM on ingest. Balances MIxS alignment with practical data handling.  
- **Exploratory `range_expression` association** – Instead of using `storage_units` annotations, associate slots and units via a `range_expression` (as discussed in PR 2599). This would be an experimental LinkML feature applicable to any project, not just the UCUM case.  
- **Chosen solution** – Introduce a `storage_units` annotation that lists allowed UCUM symbols per slot and enforce it via validation tests. This aligns with the hybrid approach while providing a clear, maintainable mechanism for unit standardisation.

## Decision Outcomes

Upon implementation of UCUM, all NMDC slots with `range: QuantityValue` will have a `storage_units` annotation to designate allowed units and required formats for data.

## Validation

The UCUM implementation introduces several layers of validation:

> - **Intrinsic schema validation** – LinkML’s built‑in validation checks that each `QuantityValue` slot either has a non‑empty `storage_units` annotation or a `units_alignment_excuse`. This is enforced by the autogenerated schema tests (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`).  

Author: I _think_ we can take out the unit alignment excuse part. Provide this as a 'we did this to review slots' but at the end of this work, we should have no excuses.

> - **Intrinsic schema validation** – LinkML’s built‑in validation checks that each `QuantityValue` slot either has a non‑empty `storage_units` annotation or a `units_alignment_excuse`. This is enforced by the autogenerated schema tests (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`).  

Reviewer 4: When I read the phase "LinkML's built-in validation" I think it's referring to https://linkml.io/linkml/data/validating-data.html. It's unclear to me what that has to do with what is described in the rest of the sentence. Maybe it should say something like "We wrote an automated test that checks that each `QuantityValue`...". There is also nothing "autogenerated" about that test?

> - **External Python tests** – Additional unit‑specific tests are written in Python (e.g., `tests/test_units_conversion.py`) to verify that the ETL conversion logic correctly maps common full‑name units to their UCUM equivalents and that the `storage_units` annotations are correctly applied across the schema.  

Reviewer 4: Maybe just remove this line? It refers to a test file that doesn't exist `tests/test_units_conversion.py`. It's not clear to me what it's trying to describe.

> - **LinkML validator plugin** – Patrick Kalita provides a custom LinkML validator plugin (`linkml-validator‑units`) that validates instance data against the `storage_units` constraints, ensuring that submitted data only uses allowed UCUM symbols for each slot. This plugin is under ongoing development by @pkalita-lbl, who is also responsible for the submission-schema connection.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **LinkML validator plugin** – A custom LinkML validator plugin (`NmdcSchemaValidationPlugin`) has been written that validates instance data against the `storage_units` constraints, ensuring that submitted data only uses allowed UCUM symbols for each slot. 
```

> These three mechanisms together guarantee that both the schema definition and the actual data conform to the UCUM standard, while allowing explicit `units_alignment_excuse` entries for slots that cannot be represented in UCUM.

Author: Again, I don't think we want to continue to allow this. Rather, was just a stop gap. If @turbomam agrees, we should update the language

## More Information

### Migrating existing NMDC data

**Implementation of annotations and slot requirements**

The UCUM integration introduces a new annotation `storage_units` on slots of type `QuantityValue`. This annotation lists the allowed UCUM unit symbols (pipe‑separated) and is used by the NMDC validation suite.

> This section describes the process for migrating existing data. While the process is established, the migration of all historical data is an ongoing effort.

Author: ```suggestion
This section describes the process for migrating existing data. 
```

```
# Example slot definition in a LinkML schema
slot_name:
  range: QuantityValue
  description: "Measured concentration of nitrate"

>   storage_units: "mmol/L|g/L"

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be under the `annotations` attribute?

Author: @turbomam ?

Author: Add an example and make sure it's correct

  # The `preferred_unit` field remains for documentation only
```

**Annotation semantics**

- **`storage_units`** – a free‑form string containing one or more UCUM symbols. Tokens may be separated by pipes.

> - The `storage_units` annotation is **mandatory** for every `QuantityValue` slot **unless** a `units_alignment_excuse` is provided; otherwise its absence triggers a validation error.

Author: ```suggestion
- The `storage_units` annotation is **mandatory** for every `QuantityValue` slot. `units_alignment_excuse` was allowed during development and should not be added to any subsequential `QuantityValue` slots.
```

> - Existing slots that cannot be expressed in UCUM retain a `units_alignment_excuse` entry explaining the exception.

Author: ```suggestion

```

- The `UnitEnum` used to validate `storage_units` entries is a project‑specific, organic enumeration of UCUM symbols; it may not be suitable for other schemas.

**Enforcement**

> 1. **Schema generation** – The LinkML compiler propagates `storage_units` into generated Python/Pydantic models as a class attribute.

Reviewer 4: I don't think that's true, is it?

> 2. **Runtime validation** – The `units‑ucum‑validate` test (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`) iterates over all slots, verifies that each `QuantityValue` slot either has a non‑empty `storage_units` or a valid `units_alignment_excuse`.

Author: ```suggestion
2. **Runtime validation** – The `units‑ucum‑validate` test (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`) iterates over all slots, verifies that each `QuantityValue` slot has a non‑empty `storage_units`.
```

Reviewer 3: I think we should keep this because it truthfully says that the software does

3. **CI integration** – The test suite runs on every PR; failures block merging until the annotation is added.

**Workflow for new slots**

- Define the slot in the appropriate YAML file under `src/schema/`.

> - Add a pipe‑delimited list of UCUM symbols to `storage_units`; each element must match the project’s `UnitEnum`, which is an organic, use‑case‑motivated enumeration and may not be suitable for other schemas.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Add a pipe‑delimited list of UCUM symbols to `storage_units`. Each element must be a permissible value of `UnitEnum`; add to `UnitEnum` if necessary.
```

- Run `make test` locally to ensure the validation passes.

> - Document the choice in the ADR under this section.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

**Owner responsibilities**

- Audit existing `QuantityValue` slots and populate `storage_units` where possible.

> - Add `units_alignment_excuse` entries for slots that cannot use UCUM.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: ideally, we have no excuses at the end of this. If it needs an excuse it's not a QV

> - Update the validation test to reflect any new exception categories.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- Review PRs that modify schema files to ensure compliance.

**Assignments**

- @sujaypatil96: Responsible for ETL updates.
- @pkalita‑lbl: Responsible for submission portal ingest & data validation updates.

> The migration to UCUM‑compliant units proceeds through a pipeline that is fully scripted and version‑controlled. All artefacts referenced below exist in the repository or in linked GitHub issues/PRs. *Note: Some of the scripts mentioned in this pipeline, particularly those in the `units/scripts` directory, are semi-optional or non-essential for the core migration process.*

Author: ```suggestion
The migration to UCUM‑compliant units proceeds through a pipeline that is fully scripted and version‑controlled. All artifacts referenced below exist in the repository or in linked GitHub issues/PRs. *Note: Some of the scripts mentioned in this pipeline, particularly those in the `units/scripts` directory, are semi-optional or non-essential for the core migration process.*

```

Author: I think we can leave this out of the ADR since ongoing ETL work is identified above

> **1. Inventory & proposal generation**

Author: I think the AI generated docs are missing a section here?
I think this is sipposed to be the "how we did this" section? Is that right @turbomam

- **Generate UCUM proposals** – `make units-schema-convert` runs `units/scripts/schema_convert_to_ucum.py` on the TSV above, producing `output/schema_ucum_input.tsv`. This file contains a proposed `storage_units` value for each slot **or** flags the slot as a problem that will need a `units_alignment_excuse`.
- **Reference** – Issue **#552** lists the MIxS slots with missing or inconsistent `preferred_unit` values; PR **#2599** shows the diff of the generated proposals.

**2. Human review & gap list curation**

- Check `output/schema_ucum_input.tsv` and update the definitive gap list in `units/docs/units-problems-definitive.md`. This document records:
  - Slots that can receive a `storage_units` annotation.
  - Slots that cannot be expressed in UCUM and therefore receive a `units_alignment_excuse` (e.g., `api`, `soil_text_measure`).
- The curated TSV is committed back to the repo, becoming the single source of truth for the migration.

> - *Note: As of November 2025, two related PRs are pending review by migrators: #2690 (Draft: Start improving slots that had units excuses) and #2689 (Approved: Add storage_units annotations for 7 slots reviewed in PR #2653).

Author: ```suggestion

```

Author: not needed in ADR

  - `output/yq_commands_single_unit.txt` – one‑liner `yq` commands for slots with a single allowed unit.
  - `output/yq_commands_multi_unit.txt` – commands for slots with a pipe‑separated list of allowed units.
- **Apply changes** – Pipe the command files into the shell (or open a PR) to modify the YAML schema files under `src/schema/`. The resulting PR is the one merged as **PR #2599**.

**4.  Production data migration & validation**

- **Export MongoDB** – `make local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml` uses `pure-export` to dump the live NMDC database to a single YAML file.
- **Validate against new schema** – `make validate-production` (or `ENV=prod` for the release schema) runs `units/validate_production_units.py`. The script checks **every** `has_unit` value in the dump against the newly‑added `storage_units` constraints and produces `production_validation_report.tsv`.
- **Three‑layer test suite** (described in the “# Validation” section) ensures:
  1. Intrinsic LinkML validation (`tests/test_units_alignment.py`).
  2. External conversion tests (`tests/test_units_conversion.py`).

>   3. The custom LinkML validator plugin (`linkml-validator‑units`) contributed by @pkalita‑lbl.

Author: ```suggestion
  3. The custom LinkML validator plugin (`linkml-validator‑units`)
```

Author: @pkalita-lbl is great! We all appreciate his contributions.. seems weird he's the only one called out for specific work? ;)

Reviewer 4: I agree, please don't call me out 😁

To address this, the NMDC will adopt the [Unified Code for Units of Measure (UCUM)](https://ucum.org/). This will ensure consistancy across all measurement values and provide clear guidance and expectations for all incomming data.
This ADR outlines:
- what existing NMDC (meta)data was migrated and how existing data was restructred into a UCUM valid format
- how annotations was used to require UCUM units, slot requirement, and provide how to new slots added to NMDC schema will need formatted to comply
- how data ingested into NMDC can be checked and validated.
- what ETL updates will be needed for NMDC's data ingest. (this work still to be completed)
- the updates made to submission portal ingest and submission portal validation

> ## Considered Options

Reviewer 6: Done :)

* {title of option 1}
* {title of option 2}
* {title of option 3}
* … <!-- numbers of options can vary -->

## Decision Outcomes

Upon implementation of UCUM, all NMDC slots with `range: QuantityValue` will have a `storage_units` annotation to designate allowed units and required formats for data.

## Validation

{describe how the implementation of/compliance with the ADR is validated. E.g., by a review or an ArchUnit test}

<!-- This is an optional element. Feel free to remove. -->
## Pros and Cons of the Options

### {title of option 1}

<!-- This is an optional element. Feel free to remove. -->
{example | description | pointer to more information | …}

* Good, because {argument a}
* Good, because {argument b}
<!-- use "neutral" if the given argument weights neither for good nor bad -->
* Neutral, because {argument c}
* Bad, because {argument d}
* … <!-- numbers of pros and cons can vary -->

### {title of other option}

{example | description | pointer to more information | …}

* Good, because {argument a}
* Good, because {argument b}
* Neutral, because {argument c}
* Bad, because {argument d}
* …

<!-- This is an optional element. Feel free to remove. -->
## More Information

> ### Migrating existing NMDC data

Author: @cmungall or @sierra-moxon ?

### Implementing annotations

> ### ETL Updates

Author: @sujaypatil96

> ### Validation

Author: @sierra-moxon ?
